Docs: Standalone-mode LLM enhancements (agentgateway 1.3) (#637)
agentgateway/website: content/docs/standalone/main/llm/providers/_index.md

Learn how to configure agentgateway for a particular LLM {{< gloss "Provider" >}}provider{{< /gloss >}}.

## Standalone authentication

> In standalone mode, upstream provider authentication is configured per model via `llm.models[].auth`. (In routing-based configurations, use `policies.backendAuth` on a route instead.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In standalone mode, upstream provider authentication is configured per model via `llm.models[].auth`. In routing-based configurations, use `policies.backendAuth` on a route instead.
```

### API key

```yaml
# yaml-language-server: $schema=https://agentgateway.dev/schema/config

llm:
  models:
  - name: "*"
    provider: openAI
    auth:
      key:
        value: "$OPENAI_API_KEY"
```

> Use `auth.key.location` to place the credential somewhere other than the default header (for example, Azure often uses `api-key`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use `auth.key.location` to place the credential somewhere other than the default header. For example, Azure often uses `api-key`:
```

```yaml
llm:
  models:
  - name: "*"
    provider: azure
    auth:
      key:
        value: "$AZURE_API_KEY"
        location:
          header:
            name: api-key
```

### Credential passthrough

To forward the validated incoming JWT to the upstream provider, use `passthrough`:

```yaml
llm:
  models:
  - name: "*"
    provider: openAI
    auth:
      passthrough: {}
```

### Cloud provider auth

> - **Google Cloud**: `auth.gcp` uses Application Default Credentials (ADC) and can fetch an access token or ID token (depending on the `type` you select).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Google Cloud**: `auth.gcp` uses Application Default Credentials (ADC) and can fetch an access token or ID token, depending on the `type` you select.
```

> - **AWS**: `auth.aws` signs upstream requests with SigV4 using standard AWS credentials (for example, environment variables, an instance profile, or a shared config profile).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **AWS**: `auth.aws` signs upstream requests with SigV4 using standard AWS credentials from environment variables, an instance profile, or a shared config profile.
```

- **Azure**: `auth.azure` uses Entra ID. `auth.azure.implicit` uses the Azure SDK's `DefaultAzureCredential` to discover credentials automatically.

```yaml
llm:
  models:
  - name: "*"
    provider: vertex
    auth:
      gcp:
        type: accessToken
  - name: "*"
    provider: bedrock
    auth:
      aws:
        serviceName: bedrock
  - name: "*"
    provider: azure
    auth:
      azure:
        implicit: {}
```

## Standalone upstream TLS

> Use `llm.models[].tls` to configure TLS when connecting to an upstream provider (for example, to trust a private CA when using a self-hosted HTTPS endpoint). Common fields include `root` for a trusted CA bundle, `hostname` and `subjectAltNames` for upstream identity checks, `cert` and `key` for client certificates, and `keyExchangeGroups` for TLS negotiation. In agentgateway versions prior to 1.3, this model-level setting was called `backendTLS`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use `llm.models[].tls` to configure TLS when connecting to an upstream provider. You might use this configuration to trust a private CA when using a self-hosted HTTPS endpoint. Common fields include `root` for a trusted CA bundle, `hostname` and `subjectAltNames` for upstream identity checks, `cert` and `key` for client certificates, and `keyExchangeGroups` for TLS negotiation. In agentgateway versions prior to 1.3, this model-level setting was called `backendTLS`.
```

When you need a custom upstream endpoint in standalone mode, set `params.baseUrl` on the model instead of older host or path override fields.

```yaml
# yaml-language-server: $schema=https://agentgateway.dev/schema/config

llm:
  models:
  - name: "*"
    provider: openAI
    auth:
      key:
        value: "$PERPLEXITY_API_KEY"
    params:
      baseUrl: "https://api.perplexity.ai"
    tls: {}
```

> ## Standalone authentication

Reviewer 2: very nit: given we are in "standalone" docs we don't really need to say "In standalone mode" right? its implied

Reviewer 2: ah unless we are calling the top level `llm` standalone and the `binds` "routing-based".  But both are 'standalone'.

In standalone mode, upstream provider authentication is configured per model via `llm.models[].auth`. In routing-based configurations, use `policies.backendAuth` on a route instead.

### API key

```yaml
# yaml-language-server: $schema=https://agentgateway.dev/schema/config

llm:
  models:
  - name: "*"
    provider: openAI
    auth:
      key:
        value: "$OPENAI_API_KEY"
```

> Use `auth.key.location` to place the credential somewhere other than the default header. For example, Azure often uses `api-key`:

Reviewer 2: Might be worth using a custom provider - any builtin ones should have custom location semantics automatically handled

```yaml
llm:
  models:
  - name: "*"
    provider: azure
    auth:
      key:
        value: "$AZURE_API_KEY"
        location:
          header:
            name: api-key
```

### Credential passthrough

To forward the validated incoming JWT to the upstream provider, use `passthrough`:

```yaml
llm:
  models:
  - name: "*"
    provider: openAI
    auth:
      passthrough: {}
```

### Cloud provider auth

- **Google Cloud**: `auth.gcp` uses Application Default Credentials (ADC) and can fetch an access token or ID token, depending on the `type` you select.
- **AWS**: `auth.aws` signs upstream requests with SigV4 using standard AWS credentials from environment variables, an instance profile, or a shared config profile.
- **Azure**: `auth.azure` uses Entra ID. `auth.azure.implicit` uses the Azure SDK's `DefaultAzureCredential` to discover credentials automatically.

```yaml
llm:
  models:
  - name: "*"
    provider: vertex
    auth:
      gcp:
        type: accessToken
  - name: "*"
    provider: bedrock
    auth:
      aws:

>         serviceName: bedrock

Reviewer 2: probably worth noting all of these are used by default for these providers
